--- PAGE 1 ---
Analog Spiking Neuron in 28 nm CMOS
Marwan Besrour ∗, Sarra Zitoun ∗, Jacob Lavoie ∗, Takwa Omrani ∗,
Konin Koua ∗, Maher Benhouria ∗, Mounir Boukadoum † and R ´ejean Fontaine ∗
∗ Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Engineering, Universit ´e de Sherbrooke, Canada
∗ 3IT Interdisciplinary Institute for Technological Innovation, Universit ´e de Sherbrooke, Canada
† D´epartement d’informatique, Universit ´e du Qu ´ebec `a Montr ´eal, Canada
Marwan.Besrour@Usherbrooke.ca
Abstract—Traditional computer clusters are facing a signiﬁ-
cant limitation as a result of the big data revolution. We need
efﬁcient edge devices to bring the power of machine learning
algorithms from power-hungry room servers to mobile consumer
platforms. Neuromorphic engineering is a promising avenue for
developing the next generation of edge devices that combine
high computing capabilities with low power consumption in
a small form factor . This paper shows the proof of concept
of an analog/mixed-signal CMOS neuromorphic system on a
chip (NeuroSoC) by presenting a low-power design of a leaky
integrate-and-ﬁre (LIF) neuron. The design uses eight transistors
and two capacitors for low complexity and potential to lead to
very dense systems. The proposed model consumes 1.2 fJ/spike
and occupies an active area of 6.73 µm by 5.09 µm when
implemented in 28 nm CMOS. The maximum spiking frequency
is 343 kHz.
Index Terms—Neuromorphic, analog CMOS, leaky-integrate-
and-ﬁre (LIF) model, machine learning, spiking neural networks
(SNN)
I. I NTRODUCTION
Modern graphics processing unit (GPU) architectures have
contributed signiﬁcantly to the current artiﬁcial intelligence
(AI) research renaissance throughout the past few decades.
GPUs are now more accessible to the general public as a result
of their low cost. The recent revolution in deep learning is
redeﬁning the nature of computing, which is driven by a surge
in pattern classiﬁcation, cognitive tasks, and massive datasets.
These days, machine learning models are frequently deployed
in the cloud, where they are trained and ﬁne-tuned.
However, real-time applications are run on the edge and
executed on mobile consumer platforms. Wireless communi-
cations, such as 5G, bridge the powerful remote ML models
and the target application gap.
Nevertheless, the demand for more specialized computing
platforms is unavoidable due to the ever-increasing trend in
data and models. The goal is to transfer the machine learning
model to a mobile platform and perform local prediction
computations. In this regard, neuromorphic computing is a
viable option for developing faster and more energy-efﬁcient
edge computing devices.
Figure 1 depicts a design ﬂow that explains the methods
utilized in neuromorphic engineering. By deﬁnition, we exploit
an efﬁcient natural process by abstracting the concept into a
mathematical model and implementing it at the system level.
As the fundamental component of a neural network, the
neuron cell is vital to overall performance. An efﬁcient way
VDD
VSS
VoutVmem
Cmem
Isyn
VDD
VSS
VoutVmem
Cmem
Isyn
VDD
VSS
VoutVmem
Cmem
Isyn
VDD
VSS
VoutVmem
Cmem
Isyn
VDD
VSS
VoutVmem
Cmem
Isyn
VDD
VSS
VoutVmem
Cmem
Isyn
VDD
VSS
VoutVmem
Cmem
Isyn
VDD
VSS
VoutVmem
Cmem
Isyn
VDD
VSS
VoutVmem
Cmem
Isyn
VDD
VSS
VoutVmem
Cmem
Isyn
VDD
VSS
VoutVmem
Cmem
Isyn
∑ ⌠ ⌡ ⌠ ⌡ 
f(∑WiXi(t)+b)
......
Wn
W2
W1
Wn-1
Biological level
Activation
 function
Circuit level
System  level
Mathematical level
Axon 
Terminal
Dendrites
Soma
Schwan 
Cell
Output Spikes
Input Spikes
Input Spikes
Input Spikes
Input Spikes
a.
c.b.
d.
Fig. 1: Design ﬂow of bio-inspired artiﬁcial neurons: a) Simpliﬁed diagram
of a biological neural cell; b) abstract model with spiking output; c) circuit
implementation; d) system level implementation for real-life application.
to formalize the neuron’s dynamics is the leaky integrate-
and-ﬁre (LIF) model [1], which closely mimics the behavior
of a biological neuron. A neuron is stimulated or inhibited
by the outputs of other neurons through synapses, where
neurotransmitter chemical compounds mediate the accumula-
tion of charges in the cell’s body via ionic channels. When
the accumulation reaches a threshold, the ionic channels are
activated to form an action potential or spike at the neuron’s
axon, and the neuron returns to its resting state. This process
is modeled in the LIF by a leaky integrator coupled with a
trigger mechanism to elicit the typical response; the resultant
spike then propagates to other LIF neurons.
The LIF model is seen in conventional ANNs as a suitable
compromise between the complexity of biologically plausible
neuron models such as the Hodgkin-Huxley and Izhikevich
models [2] [3]. The LIF model retains the analog nature
of biologically plausible neuron models, thus allowing an
efﬁcient design of neuromorphic hardware. It also avoids the
V on Neumann bottleneck paradigm, in which memory and
processing units are still separated, while being simple to train
with appropriate backpropagation techniques [4]. Neuromor-
phic hardware has led to the development of new materials
for the fabrication of electrical components that mimic the
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
978-1-6654-0105-0/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE 
 148 
2022 20th IEEE Interregional NEWCAS Conference (NEWCAS) | 978-1-6654-0105-0/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/NEWCAS52662.2022.9842088
Authorized licensed use limited to: Università degli Studi di Brescia. Downloaded on August 31,2026 at 08:52:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 2 ---
capacity of synapses to hold varying resistor values, hence
modifying the signal accordingly. To create reliable energy-
efﬁcient neuromorphic systems in CMOS technology [5],
such components still face challenges that must be addressed.
Using smaller transistors to decrease operational voltage,
hence reducing power consumption, is another method. It
signiﬁcantly minimizes the total area occupied by electronic
components, making it the de facto solution for deploying real-
time applications on edge devices. However, the reduction in
voltage also diminishes the trans-impedance gain, requiring
the insertion of buffer circuits for correction, and nulliﬁes the
size gain. Therefore, caution is required when employing this
method.
In this paper, the design of an analog spiking neuron, based
on the LIF model, using TSMC 28 nm CMOS technology is
presented. Section II explains the role of each design block
and the construction of the test benches used to validate the
proposed circuit. The post-layout simulations are presented in
Section III, followed by a discussion and comparison with
recently reported designs. The paper concludes with Section
IV , where we resume the highlight of the work presented
throughout the paper.
II. M ATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Materials
Many works have been published over the years to model
the spiking behavior of biological neurons. The most complex
one is the Hodgkin-Huxley (HH) model, which consists of
a set of nonlinear differential equations that simulate the
electrical properties of excitable cells like neurons. Izhikevich
proposed a intermediate model that accounts for various
spiking and bursting behaviors with only two differential
equations [3]. This model has already been implemented
as a CMOS circuit [6], but no large-scale system-on-chip
has been developed using this model yet. On the other end
of the spectrum, the LIF is the simplest model to emulate a
biological neuron, as it only accounts for the leaky integration
and the spiking threshold. The simplicity of this model makes
it promising for the implementation of large-scale NeuroSoC
processors in real-life applications, as is the case for the IMB
TrueNorth chip [7].
Figure 2 depicts the suggested neuron design. Three blocks
constitute the circuit. The ﬁrst block (in orange) implements a
basic current mirror. According to Equation (2), the transistor
M2 replicates the current Isyn ﬂowing through the drain of
transistor M1, which yields the current in the drain of M2:
ID2 = 1
2 Kp
[ W2
L2
]
[VGS − Vth]2 [1 + λV DS ] (1)
where Kp is a technology-related constant associated with
the transistor, W2
L2
is the width-to-length ratio of transistor M2,
VGS is the gate source voltage, Vth is the threshold voltage,
λ is the channel length modulation constant, and VDS is the
drain-source voltage.
The drain of the transistor M1 models the synaptic gap
between two neurons and where neurotransmitters are ﬂowing.
VSS
V out
M
3
M
6
M
5
I
syn
VDD
C
mem
V
mem
C
res
M
4
M
1
M
2
M
7
M
8
Fig. 2: Neuron circuit architecture. Orange: Integration block; Red: Reset
block; Green: Spike generation block.
The capacitor Cmem integrates the input synaptic current
which progressively increases the membrane voltage Vmem.
The potential at this node increases linearly when there is a
constant non-zero input current following equation (3). The
period T is variable and depends on the input ﬂow. Since
the data ﬂow in SNNs is intrinsically intermittent in space
and time, we may never accurately estimate the value of T.
Instead, the integration period is limited by the triggers set in
the following blocks.
Isyn = Cmem
dVmem
dt (2)
Vmem = 1
Cmem
∫
T
Isyndt (3)
The third block (green) is made up of two back-to-back
inverters that are used to generate spikes or artiﬁcial action
potentials at the output of the neuron. Each generated spike
encodes all integrated input spikes through the membrane
capacitance Cmem. Although this processing seems simple,
the reality is not so trivial, and there is a second temporal
dimension to consider. In fact, the inter-periods between spikes
at the input are processed through the neuron to generate
output spikes at given times and intervals.
To understand the process of generating spikes by the third
block highlighted in green, the evolution of the state variable
Vmem must be monitored. When Vmem increases to a preset
threshold level VSpike , the inverters are engaged, resulting in
a single spike at the output. The value of the spiking threshold
voltage VSpike is determined by the switching voltage of the
ﬁrst inverter composed of M5 and M6 in equation (4). In this
case, the two inverters operate as a voltage driven one-shot
circuit such that :
Vspike =
[
Vthn + VDsatn
2
]
+ r
[
V DD + Vthp + VDsatp
2
]
1 + r (4)
where Vthn and Vthp are threshold voltages, VDsat is the
saturation voltage of the drain source and r is a technology
variable where r = KpVDSAT n
KnVDSAT p
[8].
2
 149 Authorized licensed use limited to: Università degli Studi di Brescia. Downloaded on August 31,2026 at 08:52:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 3 ---
The second block highlighted in red, composed of transis-
tors M3, M4 and Cres, is activated when a spike is generated at
the output. This reset circuit acts as a discharging mechanism
to bring the membrane voltage Vmem to its resting potential,
which is about 10 mV to 20 mV . The accuracy of the resting
potential is not critical to the proper operation of the spiking
neuron as much as the offset voltage in a typical operational
ampliﬁer. When Vmem returns to its resting potential, the cycle
of integration, comparison, and spike generation can start over.
Fig. 3: Footprint of the neuron circuit implemented using the Cadence Virtuoso
Layout Suite. the layout area is rounded 5 µm by 6 µm .
B. Methods
To characterize the circuit model, several tests were per-
formed to verify the consistency of the circuit implementation
with the biological behaviors required to design large-scale
NeuroSoCs. Simulations were performed at the post-layout
stage after extraction of parasitic capacitors and resistors. The
extraction was performed after the addition of dummy metal
ﬁlls for more accurate simulation results.
1) Spiking behavior over time : In a biological neuron, the
shape of the spike is caused by the instant bursting ﬂow of
ions across the axon membrane. The circuit implementation
proposed in this paper shows a similar behavior when the
synaptic input current integrated in Cmem reaches a certain
threshold.
To carry out this experiment, we stimulated the neuron at
its input with an ideal current source. Figure 4 depicts the
excitatory stimulation. The amplitude of the current is 300 pA.
An intermittent stimulus signal is used to ensure that the
neuron only ﬁres when an excitatory current is applied and that
no spikes are generated otherwise. To test this hypothesis, the
output node of the proposed neuron is probed, and the resultant
artiﬁcial action potentials are analyzed.
2) Evolution of membrane potential : By integrating the
input synaptic current through the capacitor, the suggested
neuron circuit in this paper exhibits the same behavior as a
biological neuron. Cmem models the evolution of the mem-
brane voltage Vmem. To perform this experiment, the neuron
is excited with the same input stimulus as in the previous
experiment and the internal membrane voltage is probed at
the positive end of the membrane capacitor Cmem.
Fig. 4: Transient simulation of the membrane voltage in green for an input
current of 300 pA. Transient simulation of the output voltage in magenta:
Regular spiking of the neuron is obtained for an excitatory current of 300
pA. Characteristic simulation of the spiking frequency in red and energy
consumption per spike over the synaptic current
3) Energy consumption per event : NeuroSoCs are coveted
for their low power and high density. The proposed LIF
neuron implementation’s energy consumption is analyzed to
evaluate this factor. The current drawn by the circuit during
operation is measured, and the power supplied over the time
the neuron is spiking is calculated. In parallel, the mean
spike frequency throughout the same time period is computed.
Finally, the power consumption is divided by the frequency of
spiking to produce the energy consumption per spike of the
proposed architecture. By varying the input synaptic current,
the same experiment is repeated in a systematic manner. The
characteristic of the energy consumption drawn by the neuron
per generated spike vs. the input synaptic current is obtained
by assessing this factor over a dynamic range of excitation
current. The synaptic current dynamic ranges from 10 pA to
3000 pA.
4) Spiking behaviour versus input synaptic current :
Another interesting feature for validating the proposed design
is to repeat the initial spiking experiment by increasing the
input current and examining the mean spiking frequency at
each step. The generated waveform shall reﬂect the frequency
of the neuron’s spiking behavior over the synaptic current
dynamic range. The design’s overall layout footprint in Figure
3 is rounded to 5 µm by 6 µm . Layout techniques such
as dummy transistors and active region balancing have been
used to compensate for process variation. In sub-40nm CMOS
technologies, special effects should not be neglected. By using
large transistors at the input, the mismatch between the two
branches of the input current mirror block is reduced. Given
that the information is stored in the temporal coding between
spikes rather than the precise value of synaptic current ampli-
tude integrated in Cmem, the mismatch becomes an offset that
can be deduced and corrected via subsequent calibration.
3
 150 Authorized licensed use limited to: Università degli Studi di Brescia. Downloaded on August 31,2026 at 08:52:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 4 ---
Parameters This design* Indiveri
et al. 2006 [9]
Joubert
et al. 2012 [10]
Cruz-Albrecht
et al. 2012 [11]
Wijekoon
et al. 2008 [12]
Danneville
et al. 2019 [13]
Sourikopoulos
et al. 2017 [14]
Ferreira
2019 [15]
Ronchini et al.
2020 [6]
Technology 28 nm 0.35 um 65 nm 90 nm 0.35 um 65 nm 65 nm 55 nm 180 nm
Supp. V olt. (V) 0.2 3.3 V 1 V 1.2 V 3.3 0.2 0.2 (-0.1,0.1) 0.2
Implementation Analog Analog Analog Analog Analog Analog Analog Analog Analog
Neuron type LIF LIF LIF LIF Izhikevich A-H ML-based ML-based Izhikevich
Time scale Accelerated Biological Accelerated Biological Accelerated Biological Biological Accelerated Biological
Mem. Cap. (F) 3.4 fF 432 fF 500 fF - 100 fF 5 fF 4 fF 9*934 aF 35 fF
Energy (J/spike) 1.2 fJ 900 pJ 2 pJ 400 fJ 9 pJ 2 fJ 4 fJ 3.6 fJ 58.5 fJ
Spiking frequency 343 kHz 200 Hz 1.9 MHz 100 Hz 1 MHz 15.6 kHz 26 kHz 360 kHz -
Area/neuron (µm 2) 34 2,573 120 442 2800 34 35 85 472
TABLE I: Comparison of different neuron implementations in CMOS technology. * Post-layout simulations
III. R ESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The proposed spiking CMOS neuron model is implemented
in TSMC 28 nm CMOS technology. The design has eight
transistors and two capacitors, which minimizes the complex-
ity of the design. The silicon neuron has a surface area of
34 µm 2. The simulations were conducted after the layout
phase including all additional extracted parasitic impedance.
The results presented were obtained with a supply voltage of
200 mV .
1) Spiking behaviour over time : As illustrated in Figure
4 in magenta, artiﬁcial action potentials are generated at
the output whenever a current is present at the input. The
amplitude of the spike is around 170 mV and the missing
30 mV accounts for the saturation of the drain-to-source
voltage.
2) Evolution of the membrane potential : The evolution of
the membrane potential is illustrated in Figure 4 in green. In
the absence of an excitatory current, the membrane voltage
remains at a constant voltage level of 35 mV . The presence
of a current induces the integration of the membrane voltage,
and, once it reaches a predeﬁned threshold, an output spike is
generated. Both the membrane voltage and the output voltage
are then reset to a resting potential.
3) Energy consumption per event : This neuron has an
energy efﬁciency of 1.2 fJ/spike. This value is obtained for a
synaptic current of 30 pA. The black curve in Fig. 4 illustrates
the energy consumption per spike through the dynamic range
of the spiking neuron.
4) Spiking behaviour versus input synaptic current : The
evolution of the spiking frequency is highly correlated with
the input current, as shown in Figure 4. The peak value
reaches 334 kHz. This performance is achieved by using
small capacitors. The characteristic curve presented in red in
Figure 4 can be approximated with a square-root function plus
constants.
Table I shows a comparison between the performance of
the published spiking artiﬁcial neurons. We can notice that
a shrink in technology may not mean a gain in performance
such as in [13], [14], [6] and this design.
This design has a lower energy consumption metric than
the state-of-the-art, but the active area footprint is the same.
Furthermore, the maximum spiking frequency exceeds the
current state-of-the-art. However, the timescale in this design is
shorter than in [13], [14], [6]. In comparison to an accelerated
temporal design, such as [15], where maximal spiking rates
are comparable regardless of membrane capacitance and active
silicon footprint. Be that as it may, the methods used to
compute energy consumption in [14] and this work are not
similar.
IV. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, a leaky integrate-and-ﬁre neuron model
is proposed in 28 nm CMOS technology. The novelty of
the proposed circuit is the analog implementation of a
spiking artiﬁcial neuron using conventional 28 nm CMOS
technology. In addition, the energy consumption per event can
reach 1. 2f J/Spike and the maximum frequency of spiking
is 343 kHz . The simulation results are evaluated after the
layout extraction step. The design yielded an active surface
of 34 µm 2. These results provide additional evidence that the
proposed neuron is a promising architecture for large-scale
NeuroSoCs.
The design’s primary characteristics are ultra-low energy
usage and a small active footprint. These properties make the
neuron suitable for large-scale implementation of neuromor-
phic system-on-chip, in which weighted synapses and neurons
interact to generate complex inference-based dynamics and
bring the power of machine learning algorithms to the edge.
AKNOWLEDGEMENT
The primary author would like to thank and recognize the
contribution of each co-author and especially the dedication
of Ms. Takwa Omrani and Mr. Konin Koua in the realiza-
tion of this work. He also thanks Mr. Julien Rossignol and
Mr. William Lemaire for their comments and suggestions to
improve this paper.
4
 151 Authorized licensed use limited to: Università degli Studi di Brescia. Downloaded on August 31,2026 at 08:52:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 5 ---
REFERENCES
[1] A. N. Burkitt, “A Review of the Integrate-and-ﬁre Neuron Model: I.
Homogeneous Synaptic Input,” Biological Cybernetics , vol. 95, pp. 1–
19, July 2006.
[2] A. L. Hodgkin and A. F. Huxley, “A quantitative description of mem-
brane current and its application to conduction and excitation in nerve,”
The Journal of Physiology , vol. 117, no. 4, pp. 500–544, 1952.
eprint:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1113/jphysiol.1952.sp004764.
[3] E. Izhikevich, “Simple model of spiking neurons,” IEEE Transactions
on Neural Networks , vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 1569–1572, 2003.
[4] S. B. Shrestha and G. Orchard, “SLA YER: spike layer error reassign-
ment in time,” CoRR, vol. abs/1810.08646, 2018.
[5] M.-K. Kim, Y . Park, I.-J. Kim, and J.-S. Lee, “Emerging materials for
neuromorphic devices and systems,” Iscience, p. 101846, 2020.
[6] M. Ronchini, M. Zamani, H. Farkhani, and F. Moradi, “Tunable voltage-
mode subthreshold CMOS neuron,” Proceedings of IEEE Computer
Society Annual Symposium on VLSI, ISVLSI , vol. 2020-July, pp. 252–
257, 2020.
[7] P . A. Merolla and D. S. Modha, “A million spiking-neuron integrated
circuit with a scalable communication network and interface,” Science,
vol. 345, no. 6197, pp. 668–673, 2014.
[8] N. Borivoje, THE CMOS INVERTER - Chapter 5 , p. 150.
Berkley University, ee141: digital integrated circuits course ed.
bwrcs.eecs.berkeley.edu.
[9] G. Indiveri, E. Chicca, and R. Douglas, “A VLSI array of low-power
spiking neurons and bistable synapses with spike-timing dependent
plasticity,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, vol. 17, pp. 211–221,
Jan. 2006. Conference Name: IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks.
[10] A. Joubert, B. Belhadj, O. Temam, and R. H ´eliot, “Hardware spiking
neurons design: Analog or digital?,” in The 2012 International Joint
Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN) , pp. 1–5, June 2012. ISSN:
2161-4407.
[11] J. M. Cruz-Albrecht, M. W. Y ung, and N. Srinivasa, “Energy-Efﬁcient
Neuron, Synapse and STDP Integrated Circuits,” IEEE Transactions on
Biomedical Circuits and Systems , vol. 6, pp. 246–256, June 2012. Con-
ference Name: IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Circuits and Systems.
[12] J. H. B. Wijekoon and P . Dudek, “Compact silicon neuron circuit with
spiking and bursting behaviour,” Neural Networks, vol. 21, pp. 524–534,
Mar. 2008.
[13] F. Danneville, C. Loyez, K. Carpentier, I. Sourikopoulos, E. Mercier, and
A. Cappy, “A sub-35 pw axon-hillock artiﬁcial neuron circuit,” Solid-
State Electronics , vol. 153, pp. 88 – 92, 2019.
[14] I. Sourikopoulos, S. Hedayat, C. Loyez, F. Danneville, V . Hoel,
E. Mercier, and A. Cappy, “A 4-fJ/Spike Artiﬁcial Neuron in 65 nm
CMOS Technology,” Frontiers in Neuroscience, vol. 11, p. 123, 3 2017.
[15] P . M. Ferreira, N. De Carvalho, G. Klisnick, and A. Benlarbi-Delai,
“Energy efﬁcient fj/spike lts e-neuron using 55-nm node,” in 2019 32nd
Symposium on Integrated Circuits and Systems Design (SBCCI) , pp. 1–6,
2019.
5
 152 
 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Università degli Studi di Brescia. Downloaded on August 31,2026 at 08:52:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
